% !TeX root = link_prediction_for_diffusion_kernels.tex

\begin{abstract}

The notion of node similarity is key in many network processing techniques and
it is especially important in diffusion graph kernels. However, when the graph
structure is affected by noise in the form of missing links, similarities are
distorted  proportionally to the sparsity of the graph and to the fraction of
missing links. Here, we start to study the effectiveness of performing link
prediction  in order to improve the performance of diffusion-based kernels. We
empirically show a robust and large effect for the combination of a number of
link prediction and a number of diffusion kernel techniques on several
gene-disease association problems.

\keywords{
Graph kernels, diffusion kernels, link prediction.
}
\end{abstract}


\section{Introduction}

A powerful approach to process large heterogeneous sources of data is to use
graph encodings \cite{proceeding1} \cite{jour1} and then use graph-based
learning systems. In these systems the notion of node similarity is key. A
common approach is to resort to graph node kernels such as diffusion-based
kernels \cite{proceeding2} where the graph node kernel measures the proximity
between any pair of nodes by taking into account the paths that connect them.
However, when the graph structure is affected by noise in the form of missing
links, node similarities are distorted  proportionally to the sparsity of the
graph and to the fraction of missing links. Two of the main reasons for this
are that 1) the lower the average node degree is, the smaller the number of
paths through which information can travel, and 2) missing links can end up
separating a network into multiple disconnected components. In this case,
since  information cannot travel across disconnected components, the
similarity of nodes belonging to different components is null. To address
these problems we propose to solve a link prediction task prior to the node
similarity computation and start studying the question: {\em how can we
improve node similarity using link prediction?} In this work we review both
the link prediction literature and the diffusion kernel literature, select a
subset of approaches in both categories that seem well suited, focus on a set
of node predicting problems in the bioinformatics domain and empirically
investigate the effectiveness of the combination of these approaches on the given
predictive tasks. The encouraging result that we find is that all the
strategies for link prediction we examined consistently enhance the
performance on downstream predictive tasks, often significantly improving
state of the art results.
